>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY MAY 21: INVESTIGATORS
CONFIRM SMOKE AND POSSIBLE FIRE
ABOARD EGYPT AIR FLIGHT 804
BEFORE ITS DISAPPEARANCE; IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, FROM YOUR
HERITAGE TO YOUR HEALTH, THE
GROWING INDUSTRY THAT RELIES
UPON THE COLLECTION OF D.N.A.
SAMPLES.
>> RESEARCHERS HAVE ALREADY
GATHERED SAMPLES FROM 12,000
LOCAL RESIDENTS, AND STORED
THOSE SAMPLES IN A HUGE BIOBANK
THE SIZE OF A FOOTBALL FIELD.
>> Stewart: AND OPIOID
PRESCRIPTIONS ARE ON THE
DECLINE-- WHAT THAT MIGHT MEAN
FOR AMERICA'S EPIDEMIC OF
OPIOID-RELATED OVERDOSES.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
SEARCH EFFORTS CONTINUED TODAY
TO UNRAVEL WHAT HAPPENED TO THE
EGYPT AIR FLIGHT THAT CRASHED IN
THE MEDITERRANEAN ON THURSDAY,
KILLING ALL 66 ON BOARD.
EGYPTIAN OFFICIALS DENIED
REPORTS THEY HAD LOCATED THE
PLANE'S BLACK BOXES ON THE
BOTTOM OF THE SEA.
THE BOXES CONTAIN CRUCIAL
COCKPIT VOICE RECORDINGS AND
FLIGHT DATA.
THE U.S. NAVY HAS JOINED THE
SEARCH, WHICH HAS TURNED UP
PLANE WRECKAGE AND DEBRIS,
INCLUDING HUMAN REMAINS AND
PERSONAL BELONGINGS.
FRENCH INVESTIGATORS SAID JUST
BEFORE IT VANISHED, THE PLANE
SENT SIGNALS INDICATING SMOKE
HAD BEEN DETECTED ON BOARD, BUT
THE SOURCE OF THE SMOKE IS NOT
KNOWN AND NO CAUSES HAVE BEEN
RULED OUT.
FAMILIES OF THE VICTIMS GATHERED
TODAY IN PARIS.
EGYPT AIR FLIGHT 804 WAS EN
ROUTE FROM PARIS TO CAIRO WHEN
IT DISAPPEARED FROM RADAR ALMOST
200 MILES OFF THE EGYPTIAN
COAST.
POLICE AND HOSPITAL OFFICIALS IN
BAGHDAD SAID TODAY THAT AT LEAST
FOUR PEOPLE WERE KILLED AND
CLOSE TO 90 OTHERS INJURED WHEN
SHIA MUSLIM PROTESTERS STORMED
THE GOVERNMENT'S FORTIFIED GREEN
ZONE.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES USED
LIVE AMMUNITION, RUBBER BULLETS,
WATER CANNONS AND TEAR GAS
YESTERDAY TO REPEL THE
DEMONSTRATORS, WHO WERE
DEMANDING POLITICAL REFORMS.
BUT SOME MANAGED TO BREAK INTO
THE PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE AND
THE PARLIAMENT BUILDING.
IT WAS THE SECOND BREACH OF THE
GREEN ZONE BARRIERS IN ONLY
THREE WEEKS.
THE GREEN ZONE IS HOME TO MOST
GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS AND MANY
FOREIGN EMBASSIES.
THE PROTESTERS INCLUDED
SUPPORTERS OF THE SHI'ITE MUSLIM
CLERIC MOQTADA AL-SADR.
SADR'S DEPUTY CONDEMNED WHAT HE
SAID WAS THE GOVERNMENT'S USE OF
"EXCESSIVE FORCE."
IRAQI PRIME MINISTER AL-ABADI
AND THE UNITED NATIONS SAID THE
PROTESTS COULD HAMPER IRAQ'S
FIGHT AGAINST ISIS TERRORISTS.
IN ADVANCE OF PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
ARRIVAL IN VIETNAM THIS WEEKEND,
OFFICIALS THERE HAVE RELEASED A
PROMINENT POLITICAL DISSIDENT IN
A GOODWILL GESTURE.
HE'S THE REVEREND WIN VAN LEE, A
ROMAN CATHOLIC PRIEST WHO HAS
SPENT MUCH OF THE LAST 40 YEARS
BEHIND BARS OR UNDER HOUSE
ARREST.
LEE, WHO'S 70 AND IN POOR
HEALTH, WAS SERVING AN EIGHT-
YEAR TERM FOR WHAT OFFICIALS
CALLED "ANTI-STATE PROPAGANDA."
THE U.S. EMBASSY WELCOMED LEE'S
RELEASE BUT CALLED ON THE
GOVERNMENT TO "UNCONDITIONALLY
RELEASE ALL PRISONERS OF
CONSCIENCE."
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS EXPECTED TO
PUSH VIETNAM FOR MORE PROGRESS
ON HUMAN RIGHTS, EVEN AS HE
WEIGHS LIFTING THE U.S.
ARMS EMBARGO ON THE COMMUNIST
REGIME, WHICH IS EAGER TO
COUNTER THE GROWING INFLUENCE OF
CHINA.
MEXICO HAS APPROVED THE
EXTRADITION TO THE UNITED STATES
OF CONVICTED DRUG KINGPIN
JOAQUIN "EL CHAPO" GUZMAN.
MEXICAN OFFICIALS AGREED
YESTERDAY AFTER THE U.S. JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT SAID IT WOULD NOT
SEEK THE DEATH PENALTY AGAINST
GUZMAN, WHO IS ACCUSED OF MURDER
AND TRAFFICKING.
THE LEADER OF THE SINALOA CARTEL
IS SAID TO FACE CHARGES FROM AT
LEAST SEVEN U.S. PROSECUTORS.
BUT GUZMAN'S LAWYERS HAVE 30
DAYS TO CHALLENGE THE RULING,
AND THEY HAVE VOWED TO DRAG OUT
THE APPEALS PROCESS FOR MONTHS,
IF NOT YEARS.
GUZMAN WAS SEIZED LAST JANUARY
FOLLOWING HIS DRAMATIC PRISON
ESCAPE THROUGH A TUNNEL SIX
MONTHS BEFORE.
AND, AFTER A UNANIMOUS VOTE IN
THE SENATE LAST WEEK, YESTERDAY
PRESIDENT OBAMA SIGNED
LEGISLATION THAT REMOVES THE
RACIAL TERMS "NEGRO" AND
"ORIENTAL" FROM FEDERAL LAWS.
THEY ARE TO BE REPLACED BY
"AFRICAN AMERICAN" AND "ASIAN
AMERICAN."
IN ADDITION, "SPANISH-SPEAKING"
IS TO BE REPLACED BY "HISPANIC"
AND "INDIAN" BY "NATIVE
AMERICAN."
READ ABOUT HOW THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION AND A GROWING
NUMBER OF PUBLIC SCHOOL
DISTRICTS ARE PUSHING TO EXPAND
COMPUTER SCIENCE EDUCATION IN
SCHOOLS.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: IN THE UNITED
STATES, NEARLY 30,000 DEATHS A
YEAR CAN BE ATTRIBUTED TO THE
ABUSE OF HEROIN AND PRESCRIPTION
PAINKILLERS-- OPIOIDS LIKE
OXYCONTIN, VICODIN, PERCOCET,
AND METHADONE.
THIS EPIDEMIC, IN PART, WAS DUE
TO THE SURGE IN PRESCRIPTIONS
BEING WRITTEN OVER THE LAST TWO
DECADES.
HOWEVER, A NEW ANALYSIS REVEALS
THAT FOR EACH OF THE LAST THREE
YEARS, PRESCRIPTIONS BEING
WRITTEN FOR OPIOIDS DECLINED.
TO DISCUSS THE IMPLICATIONS OF
THIS, I AM JOINED FROM
WASHINGTON D.C. BY SABRINA
TAVERNISE OF THE "NEW YORK
TIMES."
SABRINA, YOU'VE BEEN REPORTING
ABOUT THIS AND WRITING ABOUT
THIS FOR THE "TIMES."
WHAT HAS CONTRIBUTED TO THIS
DECLINE?
>> SO, FIRST OF ALL, IT'S
SURPRISING THERE EVEN IS A
DECLINE, CONSIDERING THE FACT
THERE HAD BEEN SO MANY-- HAD
BEEN RISING FOR SO LONG, FOR SO
MANY YEARS.
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF FACTORS
THAT ARE GOING INTO DRIVING IT.
FOR ONE, THERE'S BEEN A BIG, BIG
CHANGE IN PUBLIC CONSCIOUSNESS
ABOUT THESE DRUGS.
PEOPLE BELIEVE THAT THEY ARE
DANGEROUS DRUGS NOW.
DOCTORS ARE SORT OF HOLDING BACK
FROM PRESCRIBING.
MY COLLEAGUE TALKED TO A NUMBER
OF DOCTORS THAT SAID THEY DIDN'T
WANT TO BE THE ONE WHO HAD GOT A
CALL FROM SOMEONE, A PARENT,
SAYING, YOU KNOW, "YOU WERE
RESPONSIBLE FOR MY CHILD'S
ADDICTION."
>> Stewart: ARE THERE ANY
REGIONAL PATTERNS HERE TOWARDS
THIS DECLINE?
ARE THESE DATABASES THAT SOME
STATES HAVE, HELPING OUT?
>> SOMETHING CALLED THE
PRESCRIPTION DRUG DATABASE SORT
OF TRACKING SYSTEMS.
MOST STATES HAVE THOSE NOW.
IN A NUMBER OF STATES, DOCTORS
ARE REQUIRED TO CHECK THEM IT
MAKE SURE THAT PATIENTS AREN'T
ALSO GETTING AN OPIOID
PRESCRIPTION FROM A DIFFERENT
DOCTOR.
SO THAT HAS HELPED BRING
PRESCRIPTIONS DOWN.
FOR MANY, MANY YEARS, ACTUALLY,
THE PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIES
WERE ARGUING THAT THE REASON WHY
THE EPIDEMIC WAS RAGING WAS
BECAUSE THERE WERE A FEW BAD
DOCTORS GOING FROM STATE TO
STATE, KIND OF, YOU KNOW, GIVING
OUT PRESCRIPTIONS LIKE THEY WERE
CANDY.
BUT ESSENTIALLY, YOU KNOW, THE
PRESCRIPTIONS HAD RISEN SO MUCH,
I MEAN, GOTTEN UP TO SORT OF
250, 260 MILLION PRESCRIPTIONS A
YEAR, ENOUGH FOR EVERY AMERICAN
ADULT TO HAVE A BOTTLE OF OPIOID
PILLS.
BASICALLY, THE EXPERTS CAME TO
THE CONCLUSION THAT THIS WAS A
HABIT AND CULTURE THAT HAD
FORMED IN THE MEDICAL SOCIETY
MORE BROADLY, AND NOT JUST ONE
OR TWO, YOU KNOW, A COUPLE, HAND
FULL OF PEOPLE.
>> Stewart: SABRINA, HAS THE
DECLINE IN PRESCRIPTIONS
TRANSLATED TO A DECLINE IN
DEATHS DUE TO OPIOIDS?
>> SO FAR, NO.
THE DEATHS HAVE STILL BEEN
RISING.
THE LATEST WE HAVE IS 2014, AND
THAT'S A BIT MORE THAN 28,000
OPIOID DEATHS.
ABOUT 18,000 ARE PRESCRIPTION
AND 10,000 ARE HEROIN AND OTHER
ILLEGAL DRUGS.
AND OVER-PRESCRIBING HAD BEEN
VERY CLOSELY ASSOCIATED WITH THE
RISE IN DEATHS AND THE RISE IN
OVERDOSES.
AND THE HOPE IS THAT THE DECLINE
IN PRESCRIBING IS SORT OF A
HARBINGER OR A SIGNAL THAT THE
LIFE CYCLE OF THIS EPIDEMIC
MAY BE ON THE DOWNSLOPE NOW.
>> Stewart: SABRINA TAVERNISE
FROM THE "NEW YORK TIMES,"
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Stewart: BIOBANKS--
FACILITIES THAT COLLECT AND
STORE HUMAN D.N.A. FROM SAMPLES
OF BLOOD, URINE, AND SALIVA--
ARE A GROWING INDUSTRY IN THE
UNITED STATES AND AROUND THE
WORLD.
SOMETIMES COMPANIES OFFER TO
INFORM YOU ABOUT YOUR HEALTH AND
YOUR HERITAGE.
OTHER TIMES, SCIENTISTS EXAMINE
THE DATA FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH.
THIS INTERSECTION OF SCIENCE AND
BUSINESS CAN RAISE ETHICAL AND
PRIVACY CONCERNS, ESPECIALLY FOR
INDIVIDUALS WHO SUBMIT SAMPLES.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE EXPLORE THESE QUESTIONS BY
VISITING A RESEARCH CENTER IN
NORTH CAROLINA WITH AN EVER-
GROWING BIOBANK AND AN AMBITIOUS
AGENDA.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JOHN
LARSON HAS THE STORY.
>> Reporter: WHEN YOU FIRST SEE
THE NORTH CAROLINA RESEARCH
CAMPUS NEAR CHARLOTTE, YOU'RE
STRUCK BY ITS COLOSSAL,
GEORGIAN-STYLE BUILDINGS.
BUT TO UNDERSTAND WHAT'S GOING
ON INSIDE, YOU SHOULD KNOW MORE
ABOUT WHAT CAME BEFORE.
STARTING IN THE EARLY 1900s, A
TEXTILE MILL OCCUPIED THE SAME
350-ACRE PROPERTY IN THE TOWN OF
KANNAPOLIS.
CANNON MILLS MANUFACTURED COTTON
SHEETS AND TOWELS.
AT ITS PEAK, IT EMPLOYED 20,000
WORKERS.
GILBERT CANTRELL AND HIS WIFE
BOTH WORKED THERE.
>> THE WHISTLE WENT OFF TO WAKE
YOU UP.
THE WHISTLE WENT OFF TO TELL YOU
IT'S TIME TO GO IN.
YOU WOULD SEE THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE PASSING EACH OTHER, GOING
IN AND OUT OF THE BUILDING AT
SHIFT TIME.
>> Reporter: BY THE 1990s, THE
MILL WAS STRUGGLING: CHEAP
IMPORTS WERE UNDERMINING
PROFITS.
WHEN THE MILL FINALLY WENT
BANKRUPT AND CLOSED IN 2003,
MORE THAN 4,000 WORKERS
LOST THEIR JOBS.
IT WAS THE WORST LAYOFF IN THE
STATE'S HISTORY.
>> IT DEVASTATED A LOT OF LIVES.
THEY WERE PEOPLE THAT THAT WAS
ALL THEY KNEW.
THEY DIDN'T KNOW HOW THEY WERE
GOING TO DO ANYTHING ELSE.
>> Reporter: TWO YEARS LATER, A
BILLIONAIRE CALIFORNIA INVESTOR
BOUGHT THE PROPERTY AND TORE THE
MILL DOWN.
DAVID MURDOCK, CHAIRMAN OF THE
DOLE FOOD COMPANY, WAS FOND OF
THE TOWN AND ALSO HAD ONCE OWNED
THE MILL IN THE 1980s, BUT NOW
HE HAD DIFFERENT PLANS FOR THE
PROPERTY.
MURDOCK IS AN EXTREME HEALTH AND
NUTRITION ENTHUSIAST WHO, EVEN
NOW AT 93, PLANS ON LIVING TO BE
125.
>> I BELIEVE THAT SOME OF THOSE
SOLUTIONS WILL COME RIGHT FROM
THIS SCIENTIFIC CENTER.
>> Reporter: HE HAS INVESTED
MORE THAN $800 MILLION TO BUILD
THE CAMPUS, AND LAUNCH RESEARCH
THAT HE HOPES WILL RE-INVENT
MODERN MEDICINE.
TO GET A SENSE OF THE ORIGINAL
VISION OF THE FOUNDER, ALL YOU
HAVE TO DO IS COME IN THROUGH
THE FRONT DOOR OF THE MAIN
BUILDING HERE ON THE RESEARCH
CAMPUS.
INSIDE YOU'LL FIND ITALIAN
MARBLE LINING THE FLOORS, AND IF
YOU LOOK UP, YOU'LL SEE
MURDOCK'S FASCINATION WITH
RADISHES, BLUEBERRIES, AND
HEALTHY FOODS.
AND THE EAGLE WITH AN 18-FOOT
WINGSPAN-- THAT REPRESENTS HIM.
IN THE PAST DECADE, THE CAMPUS
ENLISTED 20 PARTNERS, FROM
UNIVERSITIES LIKE DUKE AND THE
UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA TO
COMPANIES LIKE GENERAL MILLS AND
MONSANTO, HOPING, LIKE MURDOCK,
TO BETTER DETECT AND FIGHT
DISEASES INCLUDING ALZHEIMER'S,
PROSTATE CANCER, AND MULTIPLE
SCLEROSIS.
MURDOCK DECLINED TO BE
INTERVIEWED.
DOCTOR KRISTIN NEWBY IS ONE OF
HIS LEAD SCIENTISTS.
WHAT'S THE DREAM FOR THIS?
>> SO, IT'S THIS IDEA THAT WE
CAN GET BETTER AT DELIVERING THE
RIGHT DRUG TO THE RIGHT PERSON
AT THE RIGHT TIME.
>> Reporter: BUT BEFORE THEY CAN
DO THAT, SCIENTISTS MUST FIRST
CONDUCT AN AMBITIOUS STUDY,
CALLED THE MURDOCK STUDY, WHICH
MAY PLAY OUT OVER GENERATIONS.
RESEARCHERS ARE GATHERING BLOOD
AND URINE SAMPLES FROM MORE THAN
12,000 LOCAL RESIDENTS AND
STORING THOSE IN A HUGE BIOBANK,
A REFRIGERATED REPOSITORY.
IN THIS CASE, THE BIOBANK IS
NEARLY THE SIZE OF A FOOTBALL
FIELD.
THEN THE SPECIMEN'S D.N.A. IS
ANALYZED AS NEEDED.
>> THOSE SAMPLES, ALONG WITH THE
INFORMATION THAT PEOPLE TELL US
ABOUT THEMSELVES, AND THEN
THINGS LIKE THE AIR POLLUTION
LEVELS, THE TEMPERATURE, THE
HUMIDITY, ACCESS TO HEALTHY
FOODS.
AND ONCE YOU CAN START PUTTING
THAT ALL TOGETHER IN THE CONTEXT
OF HOW SOMEONE SAYS THEY FEEL,
YOU START TO GET A BROADER
PICTURE.
>> Reporter: CANTRELL DONATED
HIS SAMPLES, HOPING THEY WILL
HELP MEDICAL RESEARCH,
SPECIFICALLY IN TWO AREAS:
DIABETES, WHICH HIS DAUGHTER
HAS, AND MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS,
WHICH HE SUFFERS FROM.
>> I WANT TO BE ABLE TO HELP
SOMEBODY ELSE, SO THEY DON'T
HAVE TO GO THROUGH WHAT I'VE HAD
TO GO THROUGH FOR THE LAST 23
YEARS.
>> Reporter: THE RESEARCHERS'
GOALS ARE NOT TO ADVISE ANY
INDIVIDUAL HOW TO ACHIEVE BETTER
HEALTH, BUT TO COMBINE D.N.A.
ANALYSIS, INDIVIDUAL MEDICAL
HISTORIES, AND ENVIRONMENTAL
MEASUREMENTS OVER A LONG PERIOD
OF TIME.
IT'S LIKE THE TOWN HAS BECOME
ONE GIANT PETRI DISH.
>> WE KEEP IT PASSWORD-
PROTECTED, WE KEEP IT ENCRYPTED.
>> Reporter: HOWEVER, THERE ARE
ETHICAL CONCERNS.
PARTICIPANTS RECEIVE A T-SHIRT
AND A $10 WALMART GIFT CARD FOR
THEIR SAMPLES AND NOTHING MORE,
EVEN IF THEIR SAMPLES HELP
DISCOVER A CURE FOR CANCER OR
ANY DISEASE.
>> DO YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS
ABOUT THE CONSENT FORMS, ABOUT
THE STUDY?
>> Reporter: NOT ONLY THAT, THEY
ALSO AGREE ON THEIR EIGHT-PAGE
CONSENT FORMS, THEY DO NOT HAVE
TO BE NOTIFIED OR GIVE
PERMISSION EACH TIME THEIR
SAMPLES ARE USED IN A NEW STUDY.
AND PARTICIPANTS SURRENDER THEIR
SAMPLES INDEFINITELY, TRUSTING
THE RESEARCHERS TO DO EVERYTHING
THEY CAN TO PROTECT THEIR
ANONYMITY FOREVER.
>> IT'S SORT OF AN ODD CONCEPT,
BIOBANKING.
AND IT'S A FAIRLY NEW SORT OF
EMERGING INDUSTRY.
>> Reporter: JEAN CADIGAN IS AN
ANTHROPOLOGIST WHO STUDIES
RESEARCH ETHICS AND HAS
INTERVIEWED KANNAPOLIS DONORS.
SHE SAYS THE MURDOCK STUDY'S
CONSENT FORMS ARE NOT UNUSUAL
FOR BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH.
>> BY AND LARGE, CONSENT FORMS
FOR BIOBANKS WILL SAY THAT ONCE
YOU'VE GIVEN OVER YOUR SAMPLE,
THE UNIVERSITY OR WHATEVER
ENTITY YOU'VE GIVEN IT TO, OWNS
IT NOW.
>> Reporter: FOR ANY PURPOSE?
>> YES, FOR AS LONG AS THEY
WANT.
SO WE LIKE TO ASK PEOPLE, YOU
KNOW, "WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT
THAT?"
AND, BY AND LARGE, THEY SAY,
"WHAT?"
>> Reporter: BECAUSE NO ONE CAN
KNOW WHAT A LAB THAT USES A
BIOBANK MAY DISCOVER OR ONE DAY
CREATE, CADIGAN HAS CONCERNS
ABOUT CONSENT FORMS, AND SAYS IF
SHE WERE A RESEARCHER, SHE WOULD
EXPLAIN CONSENT TO NEW
PARTICIPANTS LIKE THIS:
>> "I CAN'T POSSIBLY BEGIN TO
DESCRIBE TO YOU WHAT THE RISKS
MAY BE.
I COULD MAKE SOME GUESSES THAT
PRIVACY WOULD BE UP THERE.
BUT BEYOND THAT, I DON'T KNOW
WHAT TECHNOLOGY IS GOING TO BE
ABLE TO DO FOR US FIVE YEARS
FROM NOW.
AFTER YOU'RE DEAD, WHAT THIS MAY
MEAN FOR YOUR CHILDREN, THAT WE
HAVE YOUR D.N.A."
>> Reporter: SO IN OTHER WORDS,
I MEAN, 30 YEARS IN THE FUTURE,
YOUR D.N.A. MAY BE TRACKABLE BY
THE GOVERNMENT, BY POLICE
AUTHORITIES, BY CORPORATIONS.
SO IN OTHER WORDS, WHO KNOWS?
>> WHO KNOWS.
>> Reporter: LET ME INVENT A
WORST CASE SCENARIO.
>> OKAY.
>> Reporter: THEY TAKE YOUR
SAMPLE, IT GOES INTO ANOTHER
STUDY AND ANOTHER STUDY.
AND EVENTUALLY SOMEHOW YOUR
SAMPLE HELPS LEAD THEM TO A
DIABETES CURE, AND IT'S TOO
EXPENSIVE FOR YOUR DAUGHTER TO
USE?
>> YEAH, THAT WOULD UPSET ME.
>> Reporter: ON THE OTHER HAND,
EVEN MORE UPSETTING, ACCORDING
RONALD BAILEY, A SCIENCE
JOURNALIST WITH "REASON"
MAGAZINE, IS THE POSSIBILITY
THAT REGULATIONS ABOUT PRIVACY
OR PROFIT-SHARING MIGHT STYMIE
INNOVATION.
>> WE'RE VERY EARLY DAYS IN A
BIOMEDICAL REVOLUTION THAT IS
ABOUT TO SKYROCKET, AND TO TRY
TO LIMIT NOW, BECAUSE OF PRIVACY
CONCERNS, WOULD BE TO HOLD BACK
SCIENCE AND TO HOLD BACK THE
BENEFITS, POSSIBLE BENEFITS,
ENORMOUS BENEFITS TO MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE.
AND THAT WOULD BE IMMORAL.
ALL THIS IS HERE, NOTHING BAD
HAS HAPPENED TO ME.
>> Reporter: TO HELP CONVINCE
PEOPLE THAT THERE IS NOTHING TO
BE AFRAID OF, BAILEY SUBMITTED
HIS OWN SALIVA SAMPLE TO THE
COMPANY "23ANDME," WHICH
ANALYZED HIS D.N.A.
>> I HAVE A HIGH RISK OF ATRIAL
FIBRILLATION.
>> Reporter: A REPORT EXPLAINED
HIS GENETIC INFORMATION, WHICH
BAILEY POSTED ONLINE FOR ANYONE
TO SEE.
>> AND WHAT I'M HOPING WILL
HAPPEN IS THAT MORE AND MORE
PEOPLE LIKE ME WILL IN FACT
PROVIDE THIS INFORMATION.
I THINK THE FUTURE IS GOING TO
BE AMAZING IF WE WILL JUST LET
IT BE AMAZING.
IF WE WILL GET OUT OF ITS WAY.
>> Reporter: AS FOR SECURITY,
MURDOCK STUDY RESEARCHERS SAY
THEY USE THE STRICTEST LEVELS OF
ENCRYPTION, AND UNDER THE
STUDY'S PROTOCOLS, THE
GOVERNMENT CANNOT COME AND TAKE
THE SAMPLES.
>> WHEN YOU GO INTO OUR
ELECTRONIC DATABASE, THE SERVER
THAT STORES ALL THE INFORMATION,
YOU BECOME A NUMBER.
SO YOU'RE DISCONNECTED FROM ALL
OF YOUR IDENTIFIABLE
INFORMATION.
>> Reporter: EVERYTHING IS
HACKABLE.
BUT CAN YOU FEEL LIKE YOU CAN
GIVE THEM A GUARANTEE?
>> I THINK YOU CAN NEVER GIVE
SOMEBODY A 100% GUARANTEE.
>> Reporter: THE PROJECT
DEVELOPERS, HOWEVER, DID PROMISE
THE CAMPUS WOULD REVITALIZE THE
LOCAL ECONOMY.
>> THE CAMPUS WAS ENVISIONED AS
AN OPPORTUNITY, A CHANCE TO KIND
OF MOVE A DEVASTATED
COMMUNITY OUT OF THAT MILL
BACKGROUND, MORE INTO A
TECHNOLOGICAL FUTURE THAT WOULD
BE AN INVESTMENT AND A GROWTH
OPPORTUNITY.
>> Reporter: THE CAMPUS NOW
EMPLOYS MORE THAN 1,000 PEOPLE,
NOTHING CLOSE TO THE 20,000 JOBS
ON AND OFF CAMPUS, MURDOCK'S
REAL ESTATE COMPANY PREDICTED.
AND MOST EMPLOYEES, HIGHLY
TRAINED IN THEIR FIELDS, COME IN
FROM OUT OF TOWN.
TAKE A QUICK WALK AROUND
KANNAPOLIS, AND YOU'LL SEE EMPTY
STORES, AND HEAR DISAPPOINTMENT.
>> I DON'T SEE WHERE IT'S HELPED
A LOT.
>> Reporter: THE OWNER OF THE
BREAKFASTIME DINER SAYS THE
RESEARCH CAMPUS HASN'T COME
CLOSE TO REPLACING THE MILL.
>> THE MILL USED TO DO CATERING
ORDERS EVERY SINGLE DAY OF
1,500, 2,500 ORDERS.
THEN, IT JUST DISAPPEARED.
AND WE THOUGHT THE WHOLE BIO
CAMPUS WAS GOING TO BENEFIT
EVERYBODY, BUT IT'S BEEN A SLOW
PROCESS.
>> Reporter: THE WEEK WE VISITED
KANNAPOLIS, RESEARCHERS SAID
THEY WERE CLOSING IN ON A
POSSIBLE BREAKTHROUGH IN
UNDERSTANDING MULTIPLE
SCLEROSIS.
THEY SAID THEY WERE LEARNING
THAT THE DISEASE ATTACKS MEN AND
WOMEN SO DIFFERENTLY, THAT IT
MIGHT BE TWO DISEASES.
DISCOVERIES LIKE THAT ARE, OF
COURSE, THE DREAM OF THE
CAMPUS'S BILLIONAIRE FOUNDER,
DAVID MURDOCK, AND STUDY
PARTICIPANTS LIKE GILBERT
CANTRELL.
>> I THINK NOTHING BUT GOOD IS
GOING TO COME OUT OF THIS
RESEARCH.
>> Reporter: YOU'RE IN?
>> I'M ALL IN.
>> Stewart: THURSDAY, A SAN
FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICER SHOT
AND KILLED A WOMAN WHO WAS
SUSPECTED OF DRIVING A STOLEN
CAR.
THE POLICE LATER SAID THAT SHE
WAS NOT ARMED AND WAS NOT
DRIVING TOWARD OFFICERS WHEN SHE
WAS SHOT.
THIS FOLLOWED OTHER FATAL POLICE
SHOOTINGS IN SAN FRANCISCO,
INCLUDING THAT OF MARIO WOODS
BACK IN DECEMBER.
VIDEO FROM THE WOODS SHOOTING
HAD INCREASED THE PRESSURE ON
POLICE CHIEF GREG SUHR TO STEP
DOWN.
AND FOLLOWING THURSDAY'S
SHOOTING, AT THE REQUEST OF
MAYOR ED LEE, SUHR TURNED IN HIS
RESIGNATION.
FOR MORE ON WHAT THIS MEANS FOR
SAN FRANCISCO AND OTHER POLICE
DEPARTMENTS TRYING TO IMPLEMENT
REFORM, I AM JOINED FROM SAN
FRANCISCO BY VIVIAN HO OF THE
"SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE."
VIVIAN, CAN YOU DESCRIBE FOR ME
THE POLICE CHIEF'S REPUTATION IN
THE COMMUNITY AND AT THE
POLITICAL LEVEL.
>> WELL, REALLY, THAT DEPENDS
ON WHO YOU ASK.
THE CHIEF HAD BEEN AROUND FOR A
VERY LONG TIME.
HE HAD 35 YEARS IN THE
DEPARTMENT.
BEFORE HE ROSE THROUGH THE RANKS
HE WAS A BEAT COP WHO SPENT A
LOT OF TIME IN A LOT OF THESE
COMMUNITIES THAT ARE ACTUALLY
PROTESTING HIM RIGHT NOW.
A LOT OF THE OLDER MEMBERS OF
THE COMMUNITY REMEMBER HIM AND
THEY LOVE HIM AND STILL THINK OF
HIM AS ONE OF THEIR OWN.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER GROUPS IN
THAT COMMUNITY WHO SEE HIM AS A
SYMBOL OF AN ARCHAIC WAY OF
POLICING, A BIASED WAY OF
POLICING, AND A WAY THAT
PUNISHED COMMUNITIES OF COLOR.
MEANWHILE, POLITICALLY, HE'S HAD
A SERIES OF SCANDALS HIT HIM
THROUGHOUT HIS CAREER, AND EACH
TIME, HE'S FOUND A WAY TO RISE
ABOVE IT AND EVENTUALLY MAKE HIS
WAY TO CHIEF.
>> Stewart: IT'S INTERESTING
THAT YOU MENTION THOSE SCANDALS.
THERE HAVE BEEN A COUPLE OF
DIFFERENT THINGS.
THE SHOOTINGS, WE DISCUSSED,
ALSO, THESE RACIST AND SEXIST
MESSAGES, TEXT MESSAGES THAT
WERE SENT THROUGH THE
DEPARTMENT.
SO, WAS HIS RESIGNATION, WAS IT
A RESULT, A CUMULATIVE RESULT OR
ONE THING THAT REALLY TIPPED THE
SCALES?
>> IT WAS REALLY MORE OF A
CUMULATIVE RESULTS.
SINCE THE SHOOTING OF MARIO
WOODS, THE COMMUNITY MEMBERS
HAVE BEEN ASKING FOR HIS
RESIGNATION FOR THE FIRST TIME.
THEY WOULD INTERRUPT COMMUNITY
MEETINGS, THEY WOULD CHANT, THEY
WOULD CALL FOR IT.
IN APRIL FIVE ACTIVISTS ACTUALLY
WENT ON A HUNGER
STRIKE CALLING ON HIM TO STEP
DOWN OR MAYOR ED LEE TO FIRE
HIM.
EACH TIME THE CHIEF DUG HIS
HEELS IN, SAYING "WE HAVE A
SERIES OF REFORMS THEY'RE
PUTTING IN PLACE.
I WANT TO OVERSEE THEM.
I'M THE MAN TO DO IT."
>> Stewart: ABOUT THOSE
REFORMS, WHAT KIND OF REFORMS
HAD HE STARTED TO IMPLEMENT OR
SAID HE WAS GOING TO IMPLEMENT?
>> HE AND THE POLICE COMMISSION
REOPENED THE DEPARTMENT'S USE OF
FORCE POLICY, LOOKING AT HOW
OFFICERS USE FORCE, HOW THEY USE
THE WEAPONS THEY HAVE, AND ARE
REALLY WORKING TO CREATE A NEW
POLICY THAT EMPHASIZES THE
SANCTITY OF LIFE, DE-ESCALATION,
CREATING TIME AND
DISTANCE, AND RESORTING TO
LETHAL FORCE AS THE VERY, VERY
LAST RESORT.
>> Stewart: OBVIOUSLY, THERE'S
A NEW POLICE CHIEF IN PLACE.
HAS HE SIGNALED ANY KIND OF PLAN
GOING FORWARD?
>> ACTING CHIEF TONEY
CHAPLIN WAS HEAD OF THE
PRINCIPAL POLICING BUREAU BEFORE
HE WAS ASKED TO STEP IN AS
ACTING CHIEF.
HE WAS LOOKING INTO PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S 21st CENTURY
POLICING RECOMMENDATIONS.
HE WAS WORKING WITH THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, WHOSE
COMMUNITY POLICING OFFICE IS IN
SAN FRANCISCO RIGHT NOW,
CONDUCTING A COLLABORATIVE
REVIEW OF THE DEPARTMENT.
HE MADE IT CLEAR ON FRIDAY AT
HIS FIRST PRESS CONFERENCE, THAT
HE VERY MUCH WANTS TO CONTINUE
THE REFORMS THAT WERE STARTED
UNDER GREG SUHR, AND HE'S
VERY COMMITTED TO MAKING
SURE THAT HAPPENS.
>> Stewart: VIVIAN HO FROM THE
"SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE,"
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: AFTER HIS VISIT TO
VIETNAM THIS WEEK, PRESIDENT
OBAMA WILL CONTINUE TO JAPAN,
BUT NOT EVERYONE IS PLEASED.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: YESTERDAY, VISITORS
AT THE PEACE MEMORIAL MUSEUM IN
HIROSHIMA EXAMINED SOMBER
REMINDERS OF THE CATASTROPHIC
EVENT 71 YEARS AGO THAT STILL
GRIPS THE NATION TODAY.
ON AUGUST 6, 1945, THE U.S.
DROPPED AN ATOMIC BOMB ON
HIROSHIMA, KILLING 140,000
PEOPLE.
A SECOND BOMB WAS DROPPED ON
NAGASAKI THREE DAYS LATER,
KILLING ANOTHER 70,000.
JAPAN SURRENDERED ON SEPTEMBER
2.
SINCE WORLD WAR TWO, NO SITTING
AMERICAN PRESIDENT HAS VISITED
HIROSHIMA, UNTIL NOW.
>> THE PRESIDENT INTENDS TO
VISIT TO SEND A MUCH MORE
FORWARD-LOOKING SIGNAL ABOUT
REALIZING THE GOAL OF A PLANET
WITHOUT NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
>> Reporter: BUT SOME JAPANESE
ARE ALREADY DISAPPOINTED WITH
OBAMA'S VISIT.
HE IS NOT EXPECTED TO MEET WITH
SURVIVORS, AND DOES NOT PLAN TO
OFFER AN APOLOGY.
>> (translated): MANY ATOMIC
BOMB SURVIVORS DON'T THINK IT'S
OKAY TO NOT APOLOGIZE.
>> Reporter: ON THURSDAY IN
TOKYO, MEMBERS OF A SURVIVORS
GROUP DEMANDED AN APOLOGY.
IN ADDITION TO INJURIES AND
RADIATION SICKNESS, MANY OF THE
ESTIMATED 180,000 SURVIVORS HAVE
FACED DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT AND MARRIAGE.
>> (translated): I THINK AN
APOLOGY IS NEEDED FOR THE REAL
VICTIMS WHO SUFFERED.
>> Reporter: BUT NOT ALL
SURVIVORS AGREE.
>> (translated): IF HE COMES
HERE AND SEES WHAT A HORRIBLE
THING THE ATOMIC BOMB IS, I
THINK THAT'S ENOUGH.
>> Reporter: JAPANESE PRIME
MINISTER SHINZO ABE HAS SAID NO
APOLOGY IS NECESSARY AND OBAMA'S
HISTORIC VISIT WILL ACHIEVE
ANOTHER GOAL.
>> (translated): I BELIEVE
THAT BY VISITING HIROSHIMA,
UNDERSTANDING THE REALITY OF
RADIATION EXPOSURE THERE,
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS GOING TO
PROVIDE A STRONG PUSH FOR
ACHIEVING A WORLD DEVOID OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
>> Reporter: ABE IS EXPECTED TO
ACCOMPANY PRESIDENT OBAMA ON
DURING HIS HIROSHIMA VISIT ON
FRIDAY.
>> Stewart: AND FINALLY TONIGHT,
A U.S. DRONE STRIKE WAS
CARRIED OUT LAST NIGHT,
TARGETING THE TOP TALIBAN LEADER
IN AFGHANISTAN, MULLAH AKTAR
MANSOUR.
REUTERS REPORTS A U.S. OFFICIAL
AS SAYING MANSOUR LIKELY WAS
KILLED.
THE STRIKE ALONG THE
AFGHANISTAN-PAKISTAN BORDER WAS
AUTHORIZED BY PRESIDENT OBAMA.
AS ALWAYS YOU CAN FOLLOW THIS
STORY ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.